JP-2980 Documentation improvement for multiprocessing: a script which spawns processes on import will cause system failure (#8408)
spacetelescope/jwst: docs/jwst/user_documentation/running_pipeline_python.rst

defaults will be used, which may be inappropriate for the dataset being processed.

See :ref:`call_examples` for more information.

.. _multiprocessing:

Multiprocessing
===============

Multiprocessing is supported to speed up certain computationally-intensive steps
in the pipeline, including the :ref:`jump detection <jump_step>`,
:ref:`ramp fitting <ramp_fitting_step>`, and
:ref:`WFSS contamination correction <wfss_contam_step>` steps. The examples below show how
multiprocessing can be enabled for these steps, as well as how to set up
multiprocessing to simultaneously run the entire pipeline on multiple observations.

> Since the pipeline uses multiprocessing it is critical that any code using the pipeline adhere to the guidelines described in the `python multiprocessing documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html#multiprocessing-programming>`_. The pipeline uses the `forkserver` start method internally and it is recommended that any multiprocessing scripts that use the pipline use the same start. As detailed in the `python documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html#the-spawn-and-forkserver-start-methods>`_ this will require that code be "protected" with a ``if __name__ == '__main__':`` check as follows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the pipeline uses multiprocessing it is critical that any code using the pipeline adhere to the guidelines
described in the `python multiprocessing documentation 
<https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html#multiprocessing-programming>`_.
The pipeline uses the `forkserver` start method internally and it is recommended that any
multiprocessing scripts that use the pipline use the same start. As detailed in the
`python documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html#the-spawn-and-forkserver-start-methods>`_
this will require that code be "protected" with a ``if __name__ == '__main__':`` check as follows
```

defaults will be used, which may be inappropriate for the dataset being processed.

See :ref:`call_examples` for more information.

.. _multiprocessing:

Multiprocessing
===============

Multiprocessing is supported to speed up certain computationally-intensive steps
in the pipeline, including the :ref:`jump detection <jump_step>`,
:ref:`ramp fitting <ramp_fitting_step>`, and
:ref:`WFSS contamination correction <wfss_contam_step>` steps. The examples below show how
multiprocessing can be enabled for these steps, as well as how to set up
multiprocessing to simultaneously run the entire pipeline on multiple observations.

> Since the pipeline uses multiprocessing it is critical that any code using the pipeline adhere to the guidelines
> described in the `python multiprocessing documentation 
> <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html#multiprocessing-programming>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the pipeline uses multiprocessing it is critical that any code using the pipeline adhere
to the guidelines described in the
`python multiprocessing documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html#multiprocessing-programming>`_.
```

defaults will be used, which may be inappropriate for the dataset being processed.

See :ref:`call_examples` for more information.

.. _multiprocessing:

Multiprocessing
===============

Multiprocessing is supported to speed up certain computationally-intensive steps

> in the pipeline, including :ref:`jump_step <jump_step>`,
> :ref:`ramp_fitting_step <ramp_fitting_step>`, and
> :ref:`wfss_contam_step <wfss_contam_step>`. The examples below show how

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the pipeline, including the :ref:`jump detection <jump_step>`,
:ref:`ramp fitting <ramp_fitting_step>`, and
:ref:`WFSS contamination correction <wfss_contam_step>` steps. The examples below show how
```

multiprocessing can be enabled for these steps, as well as how to set up
multiprocessing to simultaneously run the entire pipeline on multiple observations.

Python's multiprocessing module explicitly imports and executes a script's

> `__main__` with each and every worker. If `__main__` is not present the behavior is

Reviewer: Is this still valid or did you find out now that including `main` is not necessary?

Author: This comment is still valid. The __main__ was not necessary in the Class files but it is necessary in the code that runs the multiprocessing call.

> Python's multiprocessing module explicitly imports and executes a script's
> `__main__` with each and every worker. If `__main__` is not present the behavior is
> undefined. Hence, Python will crash unless the multiprocess code in enclosed in a
> `__main__` block like this:
> 
> 
> ::
> 
>     import sys
> 
>     def main():
>         [code used in multiprocessing]
> 
>     if __name__ = '__main__':
>         sys.exit(main())
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the pipeline uses multiprocessing it is critical that any code using the pipeline adhere to the guidelines described in the `python multiprocessing documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html#multiprocessing-programming>`_. The pipeline uses the `forkserver` start method internally and it is recommended that any multiprocessing scripts that use the pipline use the same start. As detailed in the `python documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html#the-spawn-and-forkserver-start-methods>`_ this will require that code be "protected" with a ``if __name__ == '__main__':`` check as follows

::

    if __name__ = '__main__':
        [code used in multiprocessing]

```

What do you think about changing this to link to the python docs section that provides guidance for multiprocessing? I think the links could use the intersphinx mapping (but I have little confidence that I would get the mapping right on the first try). For example, for the suggestion above the following might be replaceable:
```
`python multiprocessing documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html#multiprocessing-programming>`_
```
with:
```
:ref:`python multiprocessing documentation <python:multiprocessing-programming>`
```

There are a couple of scenarios to use multiprocessing with the pipeline:

1.  Multiprocessing within a pipeline step. At the moment, the steps that

> support this are the :ref:`jump_step <jump_step>`,
> :ref:`ramp_fitting_step <ramp_fitting_step>`,
> and :ref:`wfss_contam_step <wfss_contam_step>`. To enable multiprocessing the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
support this are the :ref:`jump <jump_step>`,
:ref:`ramp_fitting <ramp_fitting_step>`,
and :ref:`wfss_contam <wfss_contam_step>` steps. To enable multiprocessing, the
```

optional parameters are `max_cores` for the ``jump`` step, and `maximum_cores`
for the ``ramp_fitting`` and ``wfss_contam`` steps. These parameters can be

> set to `quarter`, `half`, `all`, or `none`, which is the default value.

Reviewer: I seem to recall that some of them (jump and/or ramp_fit) may now also allow a numerical value to be set?

The following example turns on a step's multiprocessing option. Notice only

> one of the steps has multiprocessing turned on. We do not recommend to
> simultaneously enable both steps to do multiprocessing, as this may likely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
one of the steps has multiprocessing turned on. We do not recommend
simultaneously enabling both steps to do multiprocessing, as this may likely
```

lead to running out of system memory.

::

    # SampleScript1

    import os, sys
    from jwst.pipeline import Detector1Pipeline

    uncal_file = 'jw0000_0000_uncal.fits'
    output_dir = '/my_project'

    def main():
        det1 = Detector1Pipeline()
        parameter_dict = {"ramp_fit": {"maximum_cores": 'all'}}
        det1.call(uncal_file, save_results=True, steps=parameter_dict, output_dir=output_dir)

    if __name__ = '__main__':
        sys.exit(main())

2. Calling the pipeline using multiprocessing. The following example uses this
option setting up a log file for each run of the pipeline and a text file with
the full traceback in case there is a crash. Notice that the ``import`` statement
of the pipeline is within the multiprocessing block that gets called by every

> worker. This is to avoid a known memory leak.

Reviewer 2: Is the memory leak addressed by?
https://github.com/spacetelescope/jwst/pull/8343

Author: nope, memory leak still happening. Will add a couple of PRs to address this.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the response. Is there an example you can share that leaks memory? I tried the example in: https://github.com/spacetelescope/jwst/issues/8404 and wasn't able to replicate it locally. If it's similar enough to the linked issue feel free to follow up there.

Author: After a chat with Ned and Brett, we concluded that the semaphore warnings is not an issue at this moment, so I closed the PRs I had open. I think the issue is not necessarily related to https://github.com/spacetelescope/jwst/issues/8404, as it is resolved if the user encloses their code in a __main__ block. The semaphore warnings could be related to the usage to lots of memory by repeatedly opening datamodels (which creates a copy of the previous model). Brett is addressing this.

            det1.call(uncal_file, output_dir=output_dir, logcfg="pipeline-log.cfg", save_results=True)
            pipe_success = True
            print('\n * Pipeline finished for file: ', uncal_file, ' \n')
        except Exception:
            print('\n *** OH NO! The detector1 pipeline crashed! *** \n')
            pipe_crash_msg = traceback.print_exc()
        if not pipe_success:
            crashfile = open(log_name+'_pipecrash.txt', 'w')
            print('Printing file with full traceback')
            print(pipe_crash_msg, file=crashfile)

    def main():
        input_data_dir = '/my_project_dir'
        output_dir = input_data_dir

        # get the files to run
        files_to_run = glob(os.path.join(input_data_dir, '*_uncal.fits'))
        print('Will run the pipeline on {} files'.format(len(files_to_run)))

        # the output list should be the same length as the files to run
        outptd = [output_dir for _ in range(len(files_to_run))]

        # get the cores to use
        cores2use = int(os.cpu_count()/2)   # half of all available cores
        print('* Using ', cores2use, ' cores for multiprocessing.')

        # set the pool and run multiprocess

>         p = multiprocessing.Pool(cores2use)
>         p.starmap(run_det1, zip(files_to_run, outptd))
>         p.close()
>         p.join()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        with multiprocessing.Pool(cores2use) as pool:
            pool.starmap(run_det1, zip(files_to_run, outptd))
```

Author: thanks for the suggestion. I removed the lines and tested it successfully runs.

    if __name__ == '__main__':

>         multiprocessing.freeze_support()

Reviewer 2: This is only required for frozen executables on Windows:
https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html#multiprocessing.freeze_support

As the pipeline doesn't support Windows it seems safe to remove this.

Author: thanks for the suggestion. I removed the lines and tested it successfully runs.

defaults will be used, which may be inappropriate for the dataset being processed.

See :ref:`call_examples` for more information.

.. _multiprocessing:

Multiprocessing
===============

> 

Reviewer 3: I would start with the pipeline steps where multiprocessing is supported, and an overview of the three scenarios below.  Something like, "Multiprocessing is supported to speed up certain computationally-intensive steps in the pipeline, including X,Y,Z.  The examples below show how multiprocessing can be enabled for these steps, as well as how to set up multiprocessing to simultaneously run the entire pipeline on multiple observations"

Author: Thanks, this is a good suggestion.

Python's multiprocessing module explicitly imports and executes a script's
`__main__` with each and every worker. If `__main__` is not present the behavior is
undefined. Hence, Python will crash unless the multiprocess code in enclosed in a
`__main__` block like this:

::

    import sys

    def main():
        [code used in multiprocessing]

    if __name__ = '__main__':
        sys.exit(main())

> There are three scenarios to use multiprocessing with the pipeline:

Reviewer 3: see my comment below about the third option

> 1. Multiprocessing with a pipeline step. At the moment, these steps are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Multiprocessing within a pipeline step. At the moment, the steps that support this are the
```

:ref:`jump_step <jump_step>`, :ref:`ramp_fitting_step <ramp_fitting_step>`,
and :ref:`wfss_contam_step <wfss_contam_step>`. To enable multiprocessing the

> optional parameters are `max_cores` for the ``jump`` step, and `maximum_cores`

Reviewer 3: this is an aside, but I wonder if we should consider changing these to all be the same

Reviewer: I agree. Given that jump appears to be the outlier (so to speak), I suggest changing the name `max_cores` to `maximum_cores` in the jump step definitions. Whatever internal names may be used can be left alone.

for the ``ramp_fitting`` and ``wfss_contam`` steps. These parameters can be
set to `quarter`, `half`, `all`, or `none`, which is the default value.

The following example turns on the step multiprocessing while setting up a log
file for each run of the pipeline and a text file with the full traceback in case
there is a crash. Notice only one of the steps has multiprocessing turned on. We
do not recommend to simultaneously enable both steps to do multiprocessing, as
this may likely lead to running out of system memory.

::

    # SampleScript1

>     import os, sys

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    import os
```
sys is imported but not used

Author: fixed

    import traceback
    import configparser
    from glob import glob
    from jwst.pipeline import Detector1Pipeline

    files = glob('*uncal.fits')
    output_dir = '/my_project'

    def mk_stpipe_log_cfg(output_dir, log_name):
        """
        Create a configuration file with the name log_name, where
        the pipeline will write all output.
        Args:
            outpur_dir: str, path of the output directory
            log_name: str, name of the log to record screen output
        Returns:
            nothing
        """
        config = configparser.ConfigParser()
        config.add_section("*")
        config.set("*", "handler", "file:" + log_name)
        config.set("*", "level", "INFO")
        pipe_log_config = os.path.join(output_dir, "pipeline-log.cfg")
        config.write(open(pipe_log_config, "w"))

    def main():

>         for item in files:

Reviewer 3: I would suggest making this example simpler by running it over only a single file, since what is being highlighted here is now to multiprocess on one file within a step

Author: I reduced the code to highlight the multiprocessing part.

            fle = os.path.basename(item).replace('.fits', '')
            log_name = os.path.join(output_dir, fle)
            mk_stpipe_log_cfg(output_dir, log_name+'.log')
            det1 = Detector1Pipeline()
            parameter_dict = {"ramp_fit": {"maximum_cores": 'all'}}
            pipe_success = False
            print('Running Detector 1 on file: ', item)
            try:
                det1.call(item, save_results=True, steps=parameter_dict, output_dir=output_dir, logcfg="pipeline-log.cfg")
                pipe_success = True
                print('\n * Pipeline finished for file: ', item, ' \n')

>             except Exception:

Reviewer 3: Similarly, is it necessary to have this try...except statement and the automated logfile open and print here?  I assume different people will have different workflows.  Instead, it may be sufficient to just say that any error messages will be printed to the log.

Although, come to think of it, is it really necessary to even make and configure the logfile here?  Again, thinking of how to slim this down to highlight the multiprocessing.  Discussion of logfile configs exists elsewhere in the docs

                print('\n *** OH NO! The detector1 pipeline crashed! *** \n')
                pipe_crash_msg = traceback.print_exc()
            if not pipe_success:
                crashfile = open(log_name+'_pipecrash.txt', 'w')
                print('printing file with crash  message')
                print(pipe_crash_msg, file=crashfile)

        print('\n * Finished multiprocessing! \n')

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        main()

2. Calling the pipeline using multiprocessing. The following example uses this
option setting up a log file for each run of the pipeline and a text file with
the full traceback in case there is a crash. Notice that the ``import`` statement
of the pipeline is within the multiprocessing block that gets called by every
worker. This is to avoid a known memory leak.

::

>     # SampleScript2

Reviewer 3: This one looks great.  In contrast with the first example script, it makes sense to set up the logfile with a script here because a separate one is being created for each filename.

        config.set("*", "handler", "file:" + log_name)
        config.set("*", "level", "INFO")
        pipe_log_config = os.path.join(output_dir, "pipeline-log.cfg")
        config.write(open(pipe_log_config, "w"))

    def run_det1(uncal_file, output_dir):
        """
        Run the Detector1 pipeline on the given file.
        Args:
            uncal_file: str, name of uncalibrated file to run
            outpur_dir: str, path of the output directory
        Returns:
            nothing
        """
        log_name = os.path.basename(uncal_file).replace('.fits', '')
        mk_stpipe_log_cfg(output_dir, log_name+'.log')
        from jwst.pipeline.calwebb_detector1 import Detector1Pipeline
        pipe_success = False
        try:
            det1 = Detector1Pipeline()
            det1.call(uncal_file, output_dir=output_dir, logcfg="pipeline-log.cfg", save_results=True)
            pipe_success = True
            print('\n * Pipeline finished for file: ', uncal_file, ' \n')
        except Exception:
            print('\n *** OH NO! The detector1 pipeline crashed! *** \n')
            pipe_crash_msg = traceback.print_exc()
        if not pipe_success:

>             crashfile = open(log_name+'_pipecrash.txt', 'w')

Reviewer 3: is it necessary to have a separate text file for the crash traceback?  could you just append it to the log instead?

Author: yes you can append it to the log but then it is not immediately obvious if something crashed. This is why I chose this option

            print('Printing file with full traceback')
            print(pipe_crash_msg, file=crashfile)

    def main():
        input_data_dir = '/my_project_dir'
        output_dir = input_data_dir

        # get the files to run
        files_to_run = glob(os.path.join(input_data_dir, '*_uncal.fits'))
        print('Will run the pipeline on {} files'.format(len(files_to_run)))

        # the output list should be the same length as the files to run
        outptd = [output_dir for _ in range(len(files_to_run))]

        # get the cores to use
        cores2use = int(os.cpu_count()/2)   # half of all available cores
        print('* Using ', cores2use, ' cores for multiprocessing.')

        # set the pool and run multiprocess
        p = multiprocessing.Pool(cores2use)
        p.starmap(run_det1, zip(files_to_run, outptd))
        p.close()
        p.join()

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        multiprocessing.freeze_support()
        main()
        print('\n * Finished multiprocessing! \n')

> 3. Using both, calling the pipeline with multiprocessing and turning on a step

Reviewer 3: I don't think this should be listed as a third option.  IMO this information would be more appropriate inside of a warning block, with some wording like "This setup is not recommended, and may cause failures"

Author: Thanks, this is a good suggestion. I added the warning box.
